Cells are the smallest living units of an organism.
All cells have 3 things in common
No matter what type of cells they are
All cells have a cell membrane which separates the inside of the cell from the outside environment.
Cytoplasm, which is a fluid (fluid) like gelatin (pudding)
and DNA which is the genetic material of the cell.
We generally have two categories of cells.
The first category are Eukaryotic cells.
They have organelles
That includes the nucleus and other special parts.
Eukaryotic cells are the most advanced and complex cells.
like those found in plants and animals
The second category are prokaryotic cells.
They have no membrane-bound nucleus or organelle.
They have genetic material, but it is not enclosed in the nucleus.
Prokaryotic cells are always uniform.
or unicellular organisms (uni-one, cell-cell), such as bacteria.
So what are organelles?
The word organel means "small organ"
Organelles are specialized parts of the cell that have specific jobs to do.
Let’s start with the nucleus, the cell’s control center.
The nucleus contains DNA or genetic material.
DNA dictates (guides) the cell what needs to be done
and how it will do it (process-work).
Chromatin is the interconnected and widespread form of DNA found inside the nuclear membrane.
When a cell is ready to divide
DNA condenses (accumulates) into structures known as chromosomes.
The nucleus also contains a nucleolus
which is a structure in which ribosomes are formed.
Once the ribosomes are removed from the nucleus
they will have as their main job -synthesis-
or protein creation.
Outside the nucleus, ribosomes and the rest of the organelles
swim around in cytoplasm, which is gelatinous substance.
Ribosomes can move freely within the cytoplasm
or cling to the endoplasmic reticulum (mesh), abbreviated as ER.
There are two types of ERs:
Rough ER (granular) which has ribosomes attached to it
and smooth (agranular) ER that has no self-adhesive ribosomes.
Endoplasmic reticulum
is a membrane-enclosed path (road) that transports materials
such as ribosome-synthesized proteins.
Proteins and other materials
emerge from the endoplasmic reticulum
in small bladders (air or fluid)
hence the Golgi apparatus, which is often referred to as the Golgi body
accepts them.
During protein excretion through the golgi apparatus they are modified
in forms (types) which the cell can use.
The body of the globe does this by splitting the proteins into usable forms.
or by adding other materials to them.
such as lipids
or carbohydrates.
Vacuoles are bags-shaped structures that store various materials.
Here, in this plant cell, the central vacuole stores water.
If we go back to animal cells
you will see an organelle called a lysosome.
Lysosomes are waste collectors.
which insert used or damaged parts of the cell.
They are filled with enzymes which process (break down) these fungal wastes.
Mitochondria are an organelle that serves as an energy source for both types:
plant and animal cells
Throughout a process known as Cellular Breathing
mitochondria form ATP molecules
which supply energy to all cellular processes.
Cells that need more energy
have more mitochondria.
Meanwhile the cell retains its shape
with the help of a cytoskeleton (cell skeleton)
The skeleton contains microfilaments in the form of fibers
which are made up of proteins
and microtubules that are thin, hollow tubes.
Some organisms
such as photoautotrophic plants
which means they receive sunlight for energy
have cells that contain an organelle called a coloroplast
Chloroplast is where photosynthesis occurs
It is green because it contains a green pigment called
Chlorophyll.
Plant cells also have a cell wall outside the cell membrane
which gives shape, supports and protects the plant cell.
Animal cells never have a cell wall
There are different types of structures that only a few cells have
Here are just a few of them.
In humans, for example, the respiratory tract is lined with cells that contain cilia.
These are microscopic designs in the form of hair
which move in the form of waves.
This ability enables the capture of airborne worms and throws them out through coughing.
Another unique feature of some cells is the flagellum.
Some bacteria have flares.
The flagellum is like a small tail that allows the cell to move or push itself forward.
The only human cell that has a flagellum
is the sperm cell
As a generalization, remember that:
Eukaryotic cells are plant and animal cells that have a membrane-bound nucleus and organelle.
While prokaryotic cells are single-celled organisms that do not have these.
All cells have a cell membrane, cytoplasm, and genetic material.
Although only plant cells have chloroplasts
both cells (plant and animal) have mitochondria.